Newsletters: add 341 (2025-02-14) (#2173)
bitcoinops/bitcoinops.github.io: _posts/en/newsletters/2025-02-14-newsletter.md

---
title: 'Bitcoin Optech Newsletter #341'
permalink: /en/newsletters/2025/02/14/
name: 2025-02-14-newsletter
slug: 2025-02-14-newsletter
type: newsletter
layout: newsletter
lang: en
---
This week's newsletter FIXME

## News

- **Continued discussion about probabilistic payments:** following

>   Oleksandr Kurbatov [post][kurbatov pp] to Delving Bitcoin last week

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Oleksandr Kurbatov's [post][kurbatov pp] to Delving Bitcoin last week
```

> - **Continued discussion about probabilistic payments:** following
>   Oleksandr Kurbatov [post][kurbatov pp] to Delving Bitcoin last week
>   about emulating an `OP_RAND` opcode (see [Newsletter #340][news340
>   pp]), several discussions were started:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Continued discussion about probabilistic payments:**
  Oleksandr Kurbatov's [post][kurbatov pp] to Delving Bitcoin last week
  about emulating an `OP_RAND` opcode (see [Newsletter #340][news340
  pp]) started several discussions:
```

  - _Suitability as an alternative to trimmed HTLCs:_ Dave Harding
    [asked][harding pp] if Kurbatov's method was suitable for use inside
    an [LN-Penalty][topic ln-penalty] or [LN-Symmetry][topic eltoo]
    payment channel for routing [HTLCs][topic htlc] that are currently
    [uneconomical][topic uneconomical outputs], which is currently done
    using [trimmed HTLCs][topic trimmed htlc] whose value is lost if
    they're pending during a channel force closure.  Anthony Towns
    [didn't think that would work][towns pp1] with the existing

>     protocol's roles due to them being the inverse of the corresponding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    protocol's roles because they are the inverse of the corresponding
```

    roles used for resolving HTLCs.  However, he thought tweaks to the
    protocol might be able to align it with HTLCs.

  - _Setup step required:_ Towns [discovered][towns pp1] that the
    originally published protocol was missing a step.  Kurbatov
    concurred.

  - _Simpler zero-knowledge proofs:_ Adam Gibson [suggested][gibson pp1]
    that using [schnorr][topic schnorr signatures] and [taproot][topic

>     taproot] rather than hashed public keys, which might significantly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    taproot] rather than hashed public keys might significantly
```

>     simplify and speed up construction and verification of the required

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    simplify and speed up the construction and verification of the required
```

    zero-knowledge proof.  Towns [offered][towns pp2] a tentative
    approach, which [Gibson][gibson pp2] analyzed.

  Discussion was ongoing at the time of writing.

- **Continued discussion about ephemeral anchor scripts for LN:** Matt
  Morehouse [replied][morehouse eanchor] to the thread about what
  [ephemeral anchor][topic ephemeral anchors] script LN should use for
  future channels (see [Newsletter #340][news340 eanchor]).  He
  expressed concerns about third-party fee griefing of transactions with
  [P2A][topic ephemeral anchors] outputs.

  Anthony Towns [noted][towns eanchor] that counterparty griefing is a
  greater concern, since the counterparty is more likely to be in a
  position to steal funds if the channel isn't closed on time or in the

>   proper stat.  Third parties who delay your transaction or attempt to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  proper state.  Third parties who delay your transaction or attempt to
```

>   increase its feerate moderately may lose some of their money in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  moderately increase its feerate may lose some of their money in the
```

>   increase its feerate moderately may lose some of their money in the
>   process, with no direct way to profit from you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  increase its feerate moderately may lose some of their money,
  with no direct way to profit from you.
```

  Greg Sanders [suggested][sanders eanchor] thinking probabilistically:
  if the worst a third-party griefer can do is raise the cost of your
  transaction by 50%, but using a griefing-resistant method costs about
  10% extra, do you really expect to be griefed by a third party more
  often than one force close out of every five---especially if the
  third-party griefer may lose money and doesn't benefit financially?

- **Stats on orphan evictions:** developer 0xB10C [posted][b10c orphan]
  to Delving Bitcoin with statistics about the number of transactions

>   evicted from the oprhan pools for his nodes.  Orphan transactions are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  evicted from the orphan pools for his nodes.  Orphan transactions are
```

  unconfirmed transactions for which a node doesn't yet have all of its
  parent transactions, without which it cannot be included in a block.
  Bitcoin Core by default keeps up to 100 orphan transactions.  If a new
  orphan transaction arrives after the pool is full, a previously
  received orphan transaction is evicted.

>   0xB10C found that, on some days, more than 10 million oprhans were

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  0xB10C found that, on some days, more than 10 million orphans were
```

- **Updated proposal for updated BIP process:** Mark "Murch" Erhardt
  [posted][erhardt bip3] to the mailing list to announce that his draft
  BIP for a revised BIP process has been assigned the identifier BIP3
  and is ready for additional review---possibly its last round of review
  before being merged and activated.  Anyone with opinions is encouraged
  to leave feedback on the [pull request][bips #1712].

## Bitcoin Core PR Review Club

*In this monthly section, we summarize a recent [Bitcoin Core PR Review
Club][] meeting, highlighting some of the important questions and
answers.  Click on a question below to see a summary of the answer from
the meeting.*

[Cluster mempool: introduce TxGraph][review club 31363] is a PR by
[sipa][gh sipa] that introduces the `TxGraph` class, which encapsulates
knowledge about the (effective) fees, sizes, and dependencies between
all mempool transactions, but nothing else. It is part of the [cluster
mempool][topic cluster mempool] project and brings a comprehensive
interface that allows interacting with the mempool graph through
mutation, inspector and staging functions.

Notably, `TxGraph` does not have any knowledge about `CTransaction`,

> inputs, outputs, txids, wtxids, prioritization, validatity, policy

Reviewer 2: I chuckled when I read the typo in the PR description, and then... managed to copy-paste it in myself 🤦

  [cluster mempool][topic cluster mempool], with all of its benefits. 2)
  Better encapsulation of mempool code, using more efficient data
  structures. 3) Makes it easier to interface with and reason about the
  mempool, abstracting away topological details such as not
  double-counting replacements.

  Drawbacks include: 1) The significant review and testing efforts
  associated with the large changes introduced. 2) It restricts how
  validation can dictate per-transaction topology limits, as is for
  example relevant to TRUC and other policies. 3) A very slight run-time
  performance overhead caused by translation to-and-from the
  `TxGraph::Ref*` pointers."
  a1link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/31363#l-54"

  q2="How many `Clusters` can an individual transaction be part of,
  within a `TxGraph`?"
  a2="Even though a transaction can conceptually only belong to a single
  cluster, the answer is 2. This is because a `TxGraph` can encapsulate
  2 parallel graphs: "main", and optionally "staging"."
  a2link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/31363#l-116"

  q0="What does it mean for a `TxGraph` to be oversized? Is that the
  same as the mempool being full?"

>   a0="A `TxGraph` is oversized when when at least one of its `Cluster`s

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  a0="A `TxGraph` is oversized when at least one of its `Cluster`s
```

  exceeds the `MAX_CLUSTER_COUNT_LIMIT`. This is not the same as the
  mempool being full, because a `TxGraph` can have more than one
  `Cluster`."
  a0link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/31363#l-147"

  q0="If a `TxGraph` is oversized, which functions can still be called,
  and which ones can’t?"
  a0="Operations that could require actually materializing an oversized

>   cluster, as well as functions that require `O(n^2)` work or more, are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  cluster, as well as functions that require `O(n<sup>2</sup>)` work or more, are
```
(maybe? I'm not sure if that works within code brackets.)

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure either, so leaving as is for now

Notably, `TxGraph` does not have any knowledge about `CTransaction`,
inputs, outputs, txids, wtxids, prioritization, validity, policy
rules, and a lot more. This makes it easier to (almost) fully specify
the class's behavior, allowing for simulation-based tests - which are
included in the PR.

{% include functions/details-list.md
  q0="What is the mempool \"graph\" and to what extent does it exist in
  the mempool code on master?"
  a0="On master, the mempool graph exists implicitly as the set of
  `CTxMemPoolEntry` objects as nodes, and their ancestor/dependant
  relationships which can be recursively traversed with
  `GetMemPoolParents()` and `GetMemPoolChildren()`."
  a0link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/31363#l-26"

  q1="What are the benefits of having a `TxGraph`, in your own words?
  Can you think of drawbacks?"
  a1="Benefits include: 1) `TxGraph` enables the implementation of
  [cluster mempool][topic cluster mempool], with all of its benefits. 2)
  Better encapsulation of mempool code, using more efficient data
  structures. 3) Makes it easier to interface with and reason about the
  mempool, abstracting away topological details such as not

>   double-counting replacements.
> 
>   Drawbacks include: 1) The significant review and testing efforts

Reviewer 3: Not sure if this newline is the reason that the rendering of this is incorrect, so a tentative suggestion to fix it

```suggestion
  double-counting replacements. Drawbacks include: 1) The significant review and testing efforts
```

  associated with the large changes introduced. 2) It restricts how
  validation can dictate per-transaction topology limits, as is for
  example relevant to TRUC and other policies. 3) A very slight run-time
  performance overhead caused by translation to-and-from the
  `TxGraph::Ref*` pointers."
  a1link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/31363#l-54"

  q2="How many `Clusters` can an individual transaction be part of,
  within a `TxGraph`?"
  a2="Even though a transaction can conceptually only belong to a single
  cluster, the answer is 2. This is because a `TxGraph` can encapsulate
  2 parallel graphs: \"main\", and optionally \"staging\"."
  a2link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/31363#l-116"

  q0="What does it mean for a `TxGraph` to be oversized? Is that the
  same as the mempool being full?"
  a0="A `TxGraph` is oversized when at least one of its `Cluster`s
  exceeds the `MAX_CLUSTER_COUNT_LIMIT`. This is not the same as the
  mempool being full, because a `TxGraph` can have more than one
  `Cluster`."
  a0link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/31363#l-147"

>   q0="If a `TxGraph` is oversized, which functions can still be called,
>   and which ones can’t?"
>   a0="Operations that could require actually materializing an oversized
>   cluster, as well as functions that require `O(n^2)` work or more, are
>   not allowed for an oversized `Cluster`. This includes operations such
>   as computing the ancestors/descendants of a transaction. Mutation
>   operations (`AddTransaction()`, `RemoveTransaction()`,
>   `AddDependency()`, and `SetTransactionFee()`), and operations such as
>   `Trim()` (roughly `O(n log n)`) are still allowed."
>   a0link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/31363#l-162"

Reviewer 4: Including LarryRuane's fixed suggestion, the `<sup>` does not work (verified locally).

```suggestion
  q4="If a `TxGraph` is oversized, which functions can still be called,
  and which ones can’t?"
  a4="Operations that could require actually materializing an oversized
  cluster, as well as functions that require `O(n²)` work or more, are
  not allowed for an oversized `Cluster`. This includes operations such
  as computing the ancestors/descendants of a transaction. Mutation
  operations (`AddTransaction()`, `RemoveTransaction()`,
  `AddDependency()`, and `SetTransactionFee()`), and operations such as
  `Trim()` (roughly `O(n log n)`) are still allowed."
  a4link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/31363#l-162"
```

  ebpf] and [#244][news244 ebpf]).

- [Eclair #2989][] adds support for [batched][topic payment batching]
  [splices][topic splicing] in the router, allowing the tracking of multiple
  channels spent in a single [splice][topic splicing] transaction. Due to the
  inability to deterministically map new [channel announcements][topic channel
  announcements] to their respective channels, the router updates the first
  matching channel it finds.

- [LDK #3440][] completes support for receiving [async payments][topic async
  payments] by verifying the sender’s invoice request embedded in the
  [HTLC][topic htlc]’s (held by an upstream node) onion message and generating
  the correct `PaymentPurpose` to claim the payment. An absolute expiry time is
  now set for incoming async payments, preventing indefinite probing of a node’s
  online status, and the necessary communication flow is added to release an
  HTLC held by an upstream node when the recipient node comes back online. To
  complete the full implementation of the async payment flow, nodes must also be
  able to act as an LSP that serves invoices on behalf of async receivers.

> - [BTCPay Server #6580][] adds a `deadline_delta` parameter to the `BumpFee` and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [LND #9470][] adds a `deadline_delta` parameter to the `BumpFee` and
```

  third-party griefer may lose money and doesn't benefit financially?

- **Stats on orphan evictions:** developer 0xB10C [posted][b10c orphan]
  to Delving Bitcoin with statistics about the number of transactions
  evicted from the orphan pools for his nodes.  Orphan transactions are
  unconfirmed transactions for which a node doesn't yet have all of its
  parent transactions, without which it cannot be included in a block.
  Bitcoin Core by default keeps up to 100 orphan transactions.  If a new
  orphan transaction arrives after the pool is full, a previously
  received orphan transaction is evicted.

  0xB10C found that, on some days, more than 10 million orphans were
  evicted by his node, with a peak rate of over 100,000 evictions per
  minute.  Upon investigating, he found ">99% of these [...] are similar
  to this [transaction][runestone tx], which seems related to runestone
  mints [a colored coin (NFT) protocol]"  It appeared that many of the
  same orphan transactions were repeatedly requested, randomly evicted a
  short time later, and then requested again.

- **Updated proposal for updated BIP process:** Mark "Murch" Erhardt

>   [posted][erhardt bip3] to the mailing list to announce that his draft

Reviewer 4: Was this intentional?

```suggestion
  [posted][erhardt bip3] to the Bitcoin-Dev mailing list to announce that his draft
```

  anchors].

## Notable code and documentation changes

_Notable recent changes in [Bitcoin Core][bitcoin core repo], [Core
Lightning][core lightning repo], [Eclair][eclair repo], [LDK][ldk repo],
[LND][lnd repo], [libsecp256k1][libsecp256k1 repo], [Hardware Wallet
Interface (HWI)][hwi repo], [Rust Bitcoin][rust bitcoin repo], [BTCPay
Server][btcpay server repo], [BDK][bdk repo], [Bitcoin Improvement
Proposals (BIPs)][bips repo], [Lightning BOLTs][bolts repo],
[Lightning BLIPs][blips repo], [Bitcoin Inquisition][bitcoin inquisition
repo], and [BINANAs][binana repo]._

- [Bitcoin Core #25832][] adds five new tracepoints and documentation for
  monitoring peer connection events such as connection lifetime, reconnection
  frequency by IP and netgroup, peer discouragement, eviction, misbehaviour, and
  more. Bitcoin Core users that have Extended Berkeley Packet Filter (eBPF)
  tracing enabled can hook into the tracepoints using the sample scripts
  provided, or write their own tracing scripts (see Newsletters [#160][news160
  ebpf] and [#244][news244 ebpf]).

- [Eclair #2989][] adds support for [batched][topic payment batching]

>   [splices][topic splicing] in the router, allowing the tracking of multiple

Reviewer 4: Linked again one line later and this link cannot even be distinguised from 'batched' link.

```suggestion
  splices in the router, allowing the tracking of multiple
```

  inability to deterministically map new [channel announcements][topic channel
  announcements] to their respective channels, the router updates the first
  matching channel it finds.

- [LDK #3440][] completes support for receiving [async payments][topic async
  payments] by verifying the sender’s invoice request embedded in the
  [HTLC][topic htlc]’s (held by an upstream node) onion message and generating
  the correct `PaymentPurpose` to claim the payment. An absolute expiry time is
  now set for incoming async payments, preventing indefinite probing of a node’s
  online status, and the necessary communication flow is added to release an
  HTLC held by an upstream node when the recipient node comes back online. To
  complete the full implementation of the async payment flow, nodes must also be
  able to act as an LSP that serves invoices on behalf of async receivers.

- [LND #9470][] adds a `deadline_delta` parameter to the `BumpFee` and
  `BumpForceCloseFee` RPC commands, specifying the number of blocks over which a
  given budget (also to be specified) will be fully allocated for fee bumping
  and a [RBF][topic rbf] will be performed. In addition, the `conf_target`

>   parameter is redefined to specify the sat/vbyte starting fee rate for a given
>   number of blocks to be targeted, for both the above RPC commands mentioned

Reviewer 4: This is incorrect, `conf_target` specifies number of blocks, not feerate.

```suggestion
  parameter is redefined to specify number of blocks for which fee estimator
  will be queried to obtain the current fee rate, for both the above RPC commands mentioned
```
